Ch3 re write - combining research design and randomization (#448)
worldbank/dime-data-handbook: chapters/sampling-randomization-power.tex

And if so, what identifier will be used?
Solving all of these questions before you acquire any data,
and making sure that the full research team knows where to find this info,
will save you a ton of time later on.

Other characteristics should be updated as the project progresses.
Example of those characteristics are:
Where will the data be obtain from?
Where in the project folder are the raw original data stored
and where are back-ups of the raw data stored?
See the wiki article linked to above for an template that you can use for your project.

If you have multiple datasets with the same unit of observation
then you should create a \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}
for each of those units of observation and include that in the required datasets.
The master dataset should include an ID variable
that can be used to link or merge all datasets with that unit of observation.
It should also list project wide time-invariant information
like sampling and treatment status.
Additionally, any unit of observation
that will be used in sampling or treatment assignment
should have a master dataset,

> and that dataset should be used when sampling or assigning treatment.

Reviewer: should think through how this relates to tidy data workflow

Reviewer: @luizaandrade - leaving the above comment open, please confirm if this section aligns with tidy data section

Author: Moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/463

> \section{Taking research design into account when planing your data work}

Reviewer: think about how to revise this (and previous section) to emphasize project workflow. this can be described in the intro. something like: create data map, assemble master dataset, create treatment identifier (either by randomization or using score or whatnot), select IE sample. in the intro to this section, refer back to this as a stage in the workflow.

Author: I like this structure of the chapter.

The most important steps in data work planning
to correctly translate a research design into data work
are sampling and treatment assignment.
Therefore, understanding and correctly implementing sampling and treatment assignment
is essential to ensuring that data is acquired properly and that research
is correctly carried out in the field, so that the results

> are valid interpretations of your research question.

Reviewer: add sentence previewing structure of this section, e.g. first we discuss when treatment assignment and sample selection apply, then provide guidelines on implementing these random process reproducibly, etc.

> Not all projects need to do sampling and treatment assignment.

Reviewer: flip to positive perspective, i.e. which projects need to assign treatment? which projects need to sample?

Reviewer: might be useful here to make the same point as in chapter 5, that this section is special considerations for randomized evaluations

Author: ok to flip to positive. 

I think random assignment is specific to randomized evaluations, but the rest of the chapter is also about sampling.

Reviewer: true, just caveat assignment then

Author: Flipped to positive in : 3d80583c8c4c91d1c550480abd6f7f04984c2c9b

> Sampling is almost always required when you collect your own data,

Reviewer: following workflow suggestion above, i think makes sense to organize content so we talk about treatment assignment first and then sampling

Author: I think sampling should come before for the following reasons:
* Sampling is more general. Both as a concept in science in general, but also that it is applicable to more projects of the audience of this book. Sampling is almost always needed, but random assignment is only experimental design.
* I am not sure if assignment always comes before sampling. Often we for example, sample 100 schools, and then we randomize which teachers will get the treatment. Also, we could collect baseline data in order to have strata and other info to do advanced random assignment on.

Since there is variation in which comes first, then I think sampling should come first as it is more general.

Reviewer: sounds fine to me

Author: this is resolved then, right?

as it is often prohibitively expensive to collect data on all individuals.
However, if the data you use is, for example,
the tax filings of all companies in a country,
then you can estimate the treatment effect
using the full population and not a sample of it.
Such big data might need a cluster of computers to process,
so you might still want to know how make a representative sample,
so that you can develop your code on a local computer
before running it on an expensive computer cluster.

> Treatment assignment is only applicable if your research design is experimental,

Reviewer: this section specifically focuses on randomized assignment. it's useful to make the point somewhere that it is always important to have a variable in the dataset identifying treatment (whether or not that is randomized). that probably is better covered in the master dataset section or research design. but useful to note again here, and probably to refer to this as 'randomized treatment assignment'

Author: ok. That should probably be brought up the first time here:

https://github.com/worldbank/d4di/blob/1bc431cd5417dcd2fc21e180128a91eff1e450c8/chapters/sampling-randomization-power.tex#L88-L94

But then be mentioned again where we discuss master data sets.

and the research team can control which individuals receive the treatment.
While you might not yet have a population dataset to sample from,
or a complete list of eligible observation to randomize assignment on,
this is still the time to understand those tasks

> and what you need to think about as you acquire those datasets.

Reviewer: flip to positive perspective. instead of what they might not have, what data is needed in order to successfully implement these random processes (acknowledging that such data might not be available yet, and that the next chapter covers data acquisition)

Randomization is used to ensure that a sample is representative and
that the treatment and control groups are statistically indistinguishable
after treatment assignment.
Randomization in statistical software is non-trivial
and its mechanics are unintuitive for the human brain.
``True'' randomization is also nearly impossible to achieve for computers,
which are inherently deterministic.\sidenote{
	\url{https://www.random.org/randomness}}
The principles of randomization we will outline
apply not just to random sampling, random assignment,
but they apply to all statistical computing processes that have a random components,
such as simulations and bootstrapping.

> The next section discuss how a random number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next subsection discuss how a random number
```

Author: technically correct yes, but is the term `sub-section` meaningful to the reader?

Reviewer: Let's push this to final review, make a decision, and apply consistently across the book. i think subsection is clear but let's check with others.

Author: Mentioned in issue here: https://github.com/worldbank/d4di/issues/455

is generated correctly in a reproducible way,

> and the following sections discuss how to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the following subsections discuss how to
```

Author: technically correct yes, but is the term `sub-section` meaningful to the reader?

Author: Mentioned in issue here: https://github.com/worldbank/d4di/issues/455

apply that random number to create a sample or assign treatment
according to the research design.
We use Stata in our examples,
but the same principles translate to all other programming languages.

> \subsection{Implementing random processes reproducibly in Stata}

Reviewer: this section is very detailed. the content is great, but consider moving some of it to the wiki.

% what it means for randomization to be reproducible
For statistical programming to be considered reproducible,
it must be possible for the outputs of random processes

> to be re-obtained at a future time.\cite{orozco2018make}

Reviewer: refer back to discussion of this in chapter 1

so do not use shortcuts such as the current date or a seed you have used before.
You should also describe in your code how the seed was selected.

% testing randomization reproducibility
Other commands may induce randomness in the data,
change the sorting order,
or alter the place of the random generator without you realizing it,
so carefully confirm exactly how your code runs before finalizing it.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Randomization_in_Stata}}
To confirm that a randomization has worked correctly before finalizing its results,
save the outputs of the process in a temporary location,
re-run the code, and use \texttt{cf} or \texttt{datasignature} to ensure
nothing has changed. It is also advisable to let someone else reproduce your
randomization results on their machine to remove any doubt that your results
are reproducible.
Once the result of a randomization is used in the field,
there is no way to correct any mistakes.

\codeexample{replicability.do}{./code/replicability.do}

\subsection{Randomized sampling}

% sampling universe: the master dataset
\textbf{Sampling} is the process of randomly selecting units of observation

> from a master list of individuals to be included in data collection.\sidenote{

Reviewer: master list is easily confused with master dataset. i think you do not mean the same thing. but might be better in that case to use a word other than 'master'

Author: I changed to "_from a list of individuals eligible to be included in data collection_" here: ae81ecc72633e01f806db3df49215ff9d4e65cb8

	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Sample\_Size\_and\_Power\_Calculations}}
\index{sampling}
That master list may be called a \textbf{sampling universe}, a \textbf{listing frame}, or something similar.
We recommend that this list be organized in a \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}},
creating an authoritative source for the existence and fixed
characteristics of each of the units that may be surveyed.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}}
The master dataset indicates how many individuals are eligible for data collection,
and therefore contains statistical information about

> the likelihood that each will be chosen.

Reviewer: this content should be moved to master dataset section that comes earlier

Author: agreed, will do.

Author: Moved in 60c5987aaab34c88162824aac60b5db6d4f64b69

so you should become familiar with exactly how it works.
The do-file below provides an example of
how to implement uniform-probability sampling in practice.
This code uses a Stata built-in example dataset and is fully reproducible,
so anyone that runs this code in any version of Stata later than 13.1
(the version set in this code)
will get the exact same randomized results.

\codeexample{simple-sample.do}{./code/simple-sample.do}

% what to think about before sampling
Almost all of the relevant considerations for sampling come from two sources:
deciding what population, if any, a sample is meant to represent (including subgroups);
and deciding whether different individuals should have different probabilities
of being included in the sample.
These should be determined in advance by the research design,
since otherwise the sampling process will not be clear,
and the interpretation of measurements is directly linked to who is included in them.
Often, data collection can be designed to keep complications to a minimum,
so long as it is carefully thought through from this perspective.
Ex-post changes to the study scope using a sample drawn for a different purpose

> usually involve tedious calculations of probabilities and should be avoided.

Reviewer: suggest deleting the whole sentence, or at least the 'should be avoided'

Author: Agreed. This is too detailed statistics for this book. Deleted whole sentence here: 26cea3645165d5523b2e263fc0a3177b71fb419c

\subsection{Randomized treatment assignment}

% what does randomized assignment mean
\textbf{Randomized treatment assignment} is the process of assigning observations into treatment arms.
Most of the code processes used for random assignment are the same as those used for sampling,
since it is also a process of splitting a a list of observations into groups.
Where sampling determines whether a particular individual
will be observed at all in the course of data collection,
random assignment determines if each individual will be observed
as a treatment observation or used as a counterfactual.
Randomizing a treatment assignment guarantees that, \textit{on average},

> the treatment will not be correlated with anything but the impact of that treatment.\cite{duflo2007using}

Reviewer: this should go in experimental design section above, and then this section should be clearly linked to experimental design

Author: done in 069a6453a0ac43e44191eeca4071fa2e106ad6c1

Sampling typically has only two possible outcomes: observed and unobserved.
Similarly, a simple random assignment has two outcomes: treatment and control,
and the logic in the code would be identical to the sampling code example.
However, random assignment often involves multiple treatment arms
which each represent different varieties of treatments to be delivered;
in some cases, multiple treatment arms are intended to overlap in the same sample.
Complexity can therefore grow very quickly in random assignment
and it is doubly important to fully understand the conceptual process
that is described in the experimental design,
and fill in any gaps before implementing it in code.
The do-file below provides an example of how to implement
a simple random assignment of multiple treatment arms.

\codeexample{simple-multi-arm-randomization.do}{./code/simple-multi-arm-randomization.do}

% Randomizing in the field
Some types of experimental designs necessitate
that random assignment results be revealed in the field.
It is possible to do this using survey software or live events, such as a live lottery.
These methods typically do not leave a record of the randomization,

> so particularly when the experiment is done as part of data collection,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as such can never be reproducible. If an experiment is done as part of data collection,
```

	In this chapter, we first cover the necessary practices to ensure that random processes are reproducible.
	We next turn to how to implement sampling and randomized assignment,
	both for simple, uniform probability cases, and more complex designs,
	such as those that require clustering or stratification.
	We include code examples so the guidance is concrete and applicable.
	The last section discusses power calculations and randomization inference,
	and how both are important tools to critically and quantitatively assess different
	sampling and randomization designs and to make optimal choices when planning studies.

	%from old design chapter

	Research design is the process of defining the methods and data
	that will be used to answer a specific research question.

	Thinking through research design before starting data work is important for several reasons.
	You will save a lot of time by understanding the way
	your data needs to be organized
	in order to be able to produce meaningful analytics throughout your projects.

\end{fullwidth}

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> \section{Planning your data based on your research design}

Author: Discussed in meeting. Will be done in the intro to this chapter

> \section{Planning your data based on your research design}

Author: Will do. Keep this comment open as a reminder until it is done.

Your project's data requirements will depend on what research design your project uses.
\index{research designs}
There are many published resources about research design,
so this chapter will only focus how these designs impact data requirements
and the tools related to them.
We assume you have a working familiarity
with the research designs mentioned here.

> For more details, you can reference Appendix XYZ,

Author: Discussed in meeting. Did not reach a conclusion other than that we will leave that decision until this round of reviews are done and then see if we think that the previous research design chapter fits in.

> For more details, you can reference Appendix XYZ,

Author: Now this reference is already in intro, making a link to wiki more difficult. Is that the thing that will tip this discussion in one direction? I still see good arguments for both options here.

> For more details, you can reference Appendix XYZ,

Reviewer: thinking about this further, my preference would be to add the content about each method to wiki pages on that method, and then link to them in the specific sub-sections in this chapter. let's discuss in today's meeting

	That event can be receiving training or cash transfer from a program, experience a natural disaster etc.}
against a counterfactual control group.\sidenote{
	\textbf{Counterfactual:} A statistical description of what would have happened
	to specific individuals in an alternative scenario,
	for example, a different treatment assignment outcome.}
\index{counterfactual}
The key assumption is that each
person, facility, or village (or whatever the unit of intervention is)
had two possible states: their outcome if they did not receive the treatment
and their outcome if they did receive that treatment.
The average impact of the treatment is defined as
the difference between these two states averaged over all units.
However, we can never observe the same unit
in both the treated and untreated state simultaneously,
so we cannot calculate these differences directly.

Instead, the treated group is compared to a group of observations
that is statistically indistinguishable,
which makes the average impact of the treatment
mathematically equivalent to the difference in averages between the groups.
In the most simple type of RCT design,

> statistical similarity is often defined using \textbf{balance} between two groups.

Author: This is also discussed in to the comment made to line number 110:

> perhaps the RCT point above is better placed in this subsection?

Is balance tables specific to RCTs? I can see them used in testing that the groups are similar in RDD? I can also see it used after pair-wise sampling to see if the groups are similar? The groups can be statistically different on average even if each pair is as similar as possible given the sample.

> statistical similarity is often defined using \textbf{balance} between two groups.

Reviewer: Balance tables are not specific to RCTs (i would argue more useful in non-randomized settings when you don't expect the groups to be the same on average).

> statistical similarity is often defined using \textbf{balance} between two groups.

Reviewer 2: Balance tables should work everywhere -- even in pairing/matching etc you should be looking for balance _conditional on controlling for the design variables_ (in that case, the pairs/strata)

> statistical similarity is often defined using \textbf{balance} between two groups.

Author: Removed RCT from section on balance table here: 8146f00813113be57ff14f3ba61a6579440e2006

This test is so common,
DIME Analytics created the Stata command \texttt{iebaltab}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iebaltab}}
to generates tables of balance checks
as part of the package \texttt{ietoolkit}.
However, different research designs have different methods
for how the statistically similar control group is identified.
This section covers how these different designs

> determine how you should plan data accordingly.

Author: Ok. Let's see where the sentence fits best after we have written the new intro.

> determine how you should plan data accordingly.

Author: Sentence is moved: 151ec7127bed808d429afcdd59146872f1cd0420

> \subsection{Identification of control groups in different research designs}

Author: ok. Again, lets come back to this once the chapter intro is re-written.

> %%%%% Experimental

Author: Ok. My first draft on the balance table paragraph did not include any mentions of RCT. While a balance table is mostly associated with RCTs, they can be used to, for example, make sure that observations across the cut-off in an RD is also balances.

@bbdaniels , not sure there was a deeper purpose to add RCT to this sentence, but do you agree that balance tables are not specific to RCTs and the balance table paragraph can be made design agnostic?

> %%%%% Experimental

Author: It was never my intention to make balance tables specific to RCTs. So after I removed the comment about RCT in section about balance table in 8146f00813113be57ff14f3ba61a6579440e2006, then this should also be resolved, right?

In \textbf{experimental research designs},\sidenote{
	For example, \textbf{randomized control trials (RCTs) --}
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Randomized\_Control\_Trials}}
\index{randomized control trials} \index{experimental research designs}
the research team can control which members
of the study population will recieve the treatment.
This is typically done by a random assignment process
in which a subset of the eligible population
is randomly selected to receive the treatment

> (see later in this chapter for how to implement such a randomization process).

Author: Done in 5e5e9fbced27c8d9396bffaede07ae75b1fdd62c

The intuition is that if everyone in the eligible population
is assigned at random to either the treatment or control group,
then the two groups will, on average, be statistically indistinguishable.

To randomly assign treatment you need data

> about all the individuals in the eligible population.

Author: Sure, but here we do not talk about sampling, only randomized treatment assignment. Do you think we need to talk about sampling here as well?

> about all the individuals in the eligible population.

Reviewer: If we want to make a specific point about data requirements for this section, it makes sense to make it applicable to both

> about all the individuals in the eligible population.

Author: this segment talks about what are requirements specific to experimental design. Random assignment is specific to experimental design, but sampling is not. I am not sure what point about sampling we can make here.

but it can be anything, from all companies in a given country's tax records
to all of the Twitter accounts that liked a given tweet.
It is important that the data on the eligible population has no bias,
such as systematically excluding poor households,
as that bias will then be included in your research design
and the results will only be applicable to the population actually included.

You should never assume that a specific intervention program
was implemented in reality exactly according to the random assignment.
The implementation of a treatment is often carried out
by field counterparts in a more complex reality than the research design.
This does not need to mean that the implementers are corrupt or have malicious intent,
but it means that field work will always be more intricate than a pure lab environment,
and that field counterparts might not be aware
that their actions are the implementation of a research program
or how they might affect the quality of the data for research.
Therefore, in addition to acquiring data on outcomes,
you must also acquire monitoring data
that tells you how the treatment assignment in the field
\index{monitoring data}

> corresponds to the intended treatment assignment.

Author: The way we have defined experimental research design is that is all designs where the research team is involved with who gets the treatment. I think we need to mention monitoring data in direct relation to this section. 

In the RDD section I talk about the need of an un-ambiguous data set listing which observations are on which side of the cut-off. We could call that monitoring data as well. And we can add that it is not just about which side of the cut-off and observations it, but also whether the program eligibility rule is followed? Would that be a solution to this?

> corresponds to the intended treatment assignment.

Reviewer: I think monitoring data is important to assess the validity of *any* study design. just the exact format of that might differ. but knowing what the intervention actually consisted of and whether it was actually delivered is important regardless of identification strategy. teams that are using secondary data for ex-post evaluations might not have any control over the monitoring system that was used, but still benefit from the data to the extent that it was there. and it's critical for all teams who are involved from the start of a study (what i mean by ex-ante design) to think about, regardless of identification strategy. so i think making this clearly not tied to RCTs is important.

> corresponds to the intended treatment assignment.

Author: Monitoring data now has its own sub-section. See here: 5b18df9533ddc7688283e725736327f65bc62ea2

including administrative data or other new classes of routinely-collected information.

%%%%% Regression discontinuity

\textbf{Regression discontinuity (RD)}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Regression\_Discontinuity}}
\index{regression discontinuity}
designs exploit sharp breaks or limits
in policy designs to separate a single group of potentially eligible recipients
into comparable groups of individuals who do and do not receive a treatment.
Common examples are test score thresholds and income thresholds,
where the individuals on one side of some threshold receive
a treatment but those on the other side do not.\sidenote{
	\url{https://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/regression-discontinuity-porn}}

The intuition is that, on average,
individuals immediately on one side of the threshold
are statistically indistinguishable from the individuals on the other side,
and the only difference is receiving the treatment.
In your data you need an unambiguous way
to define which observations were above or below the cutoff.
Apart from that requirement there are no special needs for the data,
and you can use any type of primary or secondary data in an RD design.

> 

Author: You mean that one sentence about data is sparse? The preceding sentence is also about data. I think the preceding sentence is what is what matters, ie. that you need to document the discontinuity with no ambiguity. In another comment I replied that this can be seen as monitor data and I am happy to call it that. 

Regarding the link to example. Agreed, that is a great way to meet the request. How do you envision these references to DIME project to work? I was thinking them being side-notes. Or do you envision them being a part of the main text? I am wondering as if it is a side-note only, it would not solve the sparseness of "one sentence"

> 

Reviewer: I think it's useful to reframe the paragraph so that it is very clearly about the data requirements for RDD - earlier sentence does apply to but that isn't clear from the structure. i think we can mention the example in the text and then provide the citation as a sidenote.

%%%%% IV regression

\textbf{Instrumental variables (IV)}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Instrumental\_Variables}}
\index{instrumental variables}
designs, unlike the previous approaches,
assume that the treatment effect is not directly identifiable.
Similar to RD designs,
IV designs focus on a subset of the variation in treatment take-up.
Where RD designs use a ``sharp'' or binary cutoff,
IV designs are ``fuzzy'', meaning that the input does not completely determine
the treatment status, but instead influence the \textit{probability of treatment}.

You will need variables in your data
that can be used to estimate the probability of treatment for each unit.
These variables are called \textit{instruments}.
Testing that a variable is a valid instrument is a non-trivial and important task

> that is outside the scope of this book.

Author: I think this is an example of an econometric discussion that we are not experts on, which was Arianna's feedback on the previous chapter on research design. We can include code on how to run the first stage and second stage regressions, but how to interpret if an instrument is valid and strong is non-trivial. I do not even think the field has agreed on this, and I think it is outside the scope of this book to make a contribution to that debate. That was my thinking.

> that is outside the scope of this book.

Reviewer: that's fair. i think better to add the code you mentioned and remove this. better to speak to what we can contribute, than emphasize what we cannot.

In IV designs, instead of the ordinary regression estimator,
a special version called two-stage least squares (2SLS) is used
to estimate the impact of the treatment.
Stata has a built-in command called \texttt{ivregress},

> and another popular implementation is the user-written command \texttt{ivreg2}.

Author: LWe will definitely link to a DIME project that uses IV regressions. But is your commend that we should link to code in a DIME example?

> and another popular implementation is the user-written command \texttt{ivreg2}.

Reviewer: ideal would be to link to a DIME example that has public code

%%%%% Matching

\textbf{Matching}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Matching}}
methods use observable characteristics to construct
sets or pairs of treatment and control units
so that the observations in each set are as similar as possible. \index{matching}
These sets can either consist of exactly one treatment and one control observation (one-to-one),
or it can be a set observations where either
both groups have more than one observation represented (many-to-many),
or where only one group has more than one observation included (one-to-many).

The matching can even be done before the random assignment,
so that treatment can be randomized within each matching set.
This is a type of experimental design.
Furthermore, if no control observations were identified before the treatment,
then matching can be used to ex-post identify a control group,
by finding the observations that are the most similar to the treated group.
It is very difficult to test the validity of an ex-post matching
as one would have to show that the difference in outcome is

> due to the impact of the treatment and not due to the groups not being similar enough.

Author: How do we define the balance we want to strive for here? I can go both ways on this comment, but I think the text this comment refer to is similar to what you are suggesting to be added in the comment quoted to below: 

> this reads as though quase-experimental research is always ex-post, but it is also often designed prospectively. and the team can be as directive about data as in an RCT (including collecting survey data)

Do not mean to start a you-said-this/you-said-that discussion. Just want to discuss how to balance this. The objective of the chapter is to discuss the data needs based on statistics, and then some content on statistics is needed. How do we define this balance? I am not sure.

> due to the impact of the treatment and not due to the groups not being similar enough.

Reviewer: I think ideally we have 2 paragraphs per method; 1) summary/explanation of stats, and 2) data requirements / structure. in this case there were two paragraphs fitting the content of 1) above, so seemed better to remove some to appendix / combine and streamline into 1 paragraph.

A valid matching must be made on data that is not related to the treatment
or anything that the treatment could have affected in any way.
Many matching algorithms can only match on a single variable,
so you first have to turn many variables into a single varaible
by using an index or a propensity score.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Propensity\_Score\_Matching}}
The \texttt{iematch}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iematch}}
command in the \texttt{ietoolkit} package developed by DIME Analytics

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Author: Isn't that explained in the text? On most places where we mention `ietoolkit` commands we first say "you should do this" and then "this command does that", and I think that is what we are doing here as well. Is this case different?

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Reviewer: there isn't anything in the text about the gap that we tried to fill with ietoolkit. in general i think that's an important part of the pitch for any of these tools. that may be as simple as saying something like there was not a tool to produce matches based on single continuous variable, which is a common use case in DIME. Analytics built iematch to meet that need.

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Author: I like your suggestion had there been neat origin stories for the `ietoolkit` commands. But it is usually not the case. For example, for `iematch` I had some code that solved this neatly that I kept reusing and modifying each time until it was almost a command, and then I did the last programming needed to make it a command. There was never the case that I did a thorough  search for a command that solved this. I did look until I felt I started to spend more time looking that just writing it myself. I think that is the most common case for most commands. 

It has rarely been the case we started with an empty do-file to fill a need that we saw.  We can say that we did that, but it would not be the truth. And I do not know if there was a command  out there that I did not find immediately the first time I programmed my own matching code that became the embryo for `iematch`.

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Reviewer: Ok. My assumption was that it wouldn't have made sense to spend time developing our own commands without doing some survey of what was out there and whether some other tool already met the need.

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Author: We kind of did that, but not in one big sitting, it is a much more dynamic process over time than that. Each time before adding to my own code it was preceded by searching for an already existing command. If I had found such a command in a quick search, I would not have created my own code. Each time I or someone else wanted to reuse the code snippet it always started with a quick search, but since any conclusive search that the additional feature did not exist in some other command would take longer time than just adding that feature, I never did that conclusive survey of what was out there. I am pretty convinced that the sum of all quick searches means it does not exists, but I do not know for sure as it is a much more dynamic process than that. Almost none of these commands started with a blank ado-file with the intention of writing a command, and that is why there was never a survey.

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Reviewer: suggested rewording: 
DIME Analytics developed a command to match observations based on this single continuous variable: \texttt{iematch}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iematch}}, part of the \texttt{ietoolkit} package.

> produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

Author: Implemented in 43d9dbf1cce12cf8222915b0aee0480fa8153673

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> \subsection{One observation or multiple observations over time}

Author: Any suggestion on what to call this section? I went back and forth on many examples:
* _Recording observations over time_ - Sounds better than current title but while it cover most of what this section is about, it does not cover everything
* _Longitudinal vs cross section data_ - Correct but using technical terms we have not explained yet

Any other suggestions?

> \subsection{One observation or multiple observations over time}

Reviewer: what about "Structuring datasets over multiple time periods"?

> \subsection{One observation or multiple observations over time}

Author: Better than both my suggestions. My only concern is that it does not cover _cross-section data_ that is also a part of this section. But since most of this section is about longitudinal I still went ahead and updated to your suggestion. We can update later if needed, and this is much better than what I had. 51e9ec201901bed2ce0557bb3a691d6820f75735

\index{cross-sectional data}
This type of data is relatively easy to collect and handle because
you do not need to track individuals across time.
Instead, the challenge in a cross-sectional study is to
show that the control group is indeed a valid counterfactual to the treatment group.

A study that observes data in multiple time periods is called \textbf{longitudinal} and
can either be a \textbf{repeated cross-sections} or a \textbf{panel data} study
\index{longitudinal data} \index{repeated cross-sectional data} \index{panel data}
depending on whether the same observations is included in each of the time periods.
In repeated cross-sections,
each successive round of data collection uses a new random sample
of observations from the treatment and control groups,
but in a panel data study the same observations are tracked and included each round.

While you can control for both trends
and for each observation's initial status (in \textbf{panel data studies}),
longitudinal data requires you
to have a way to track the observations over periods of time.
If you are collecting your own data, this is a big challenge
and requires a lot more effort during field work

> as detailed tracking records must be kept.

Reviewer: @Avnish95

You must keep track of the attrition rate,
which is the share of observations not observed in follow-up data.
It is common that the observations not possible to track
can be correlated with the outcome you study.
For example, poorer households may live in more informal dwellings,
patients with worse health conditions might not survive to follow-up,
and so on.
If this is the case, then your results might only be an effect of your remaining sample
being a subset of the original sample that were better or worse off from the beginning.
A balance check could provide insights
as to whether the lost observations were systematically different
compared to the rest of the sample,
and there are a variety of methods for estimating treatment effects
with selective attrition.

> \subsection{Creating a data map}

Author: I could do that, but I do think this is what wraps up the comments made previously in this section. And if we were to make this a section, then we would have add more content, but that level of detail on just a data map might be better for the wiki. I can look into this as I update this part after the wiki page exist

or a multitude of complex combinations of the above.
For example, you may have different levels of unit-of-observation\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}},
or the units of observation you do have (or their subunits)
may vary from round to round.

However your study is structured, you need to know how to link all the datasets you obtain
and analyze the relationships between the units that appear in them
to answer all your research questions.
You might think that you are able to keep all of the relevant details in your head,
but your whole research team is unlikely to have the same understanding,
at all times, of all the datasets required.
The only way to make sure that the full team shares the same understanding
is to create \textit{master datasets} and a \textit{data map}.

\subsection{Creating master datasets and a data map}

A \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}},
\index{master datasets}
at the very least,
details all project-wide time-invariant information
about all units that could appear in the data
and their relationship to the research design,

> like sampling and treatment status once those are determined.

Author: Suggestion from @bbdaniels : "A master dataset is created using..." I will add text on this after I have added all small edits

Reviewer: @kbjarkefur is this resolved?

Author: done now in 71a92ade7d6d0033e88d920a5ca5db7587600898

If the information is missing for one unit, 
then the reason should always be indicated with a code.
An example for such reason could be that a unit was not included in the treatment assignment
as it was not sampled in the first place.

\subsection{Defining study comparisons using master data}

Your research design will determine what statistical comparisons you need
to estimate in your analytical work.
The research designs discussed here compare a group that received
some kind of \textbf{treatment}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Treatment:} The general word for the evaluated intervention or event.
	This includes being offered training or cash transfer from a program, experiencing a natural disaster etc.}
against a counterfactual control group.\sidenote{
	\textbf{Counterfactual:} A statistical description of what would have happened
	to specific individuals in an alternative scenario,
	for example, a different treatment assignment outcome.}
\index{counterfactual}
The key assumption is that each
person, facility, or village (or whatever the unit of intervention is)
had two possible states: their outcome if they did receive the treatment
and their outcome if they did not receive that treatment.

> The average impact of the treatment is defined as

Author: Suggestion from @bbdaniels : Define ATE and/or link to ATE resources

Author: done in 7e2e8c1af1819d5442e3b5e62f8fc87e0b987f76

This is a type of experimental design.
Furthermore, if no control observations were identified before the treatment,
then matching can be used to ex-post identify a control group,
by finding the observations that are the most similar to the treated group.
It is very difficult to test the validity of an ex-post matching
as one would have to show that the difference in outcome is
due to the impact of the treatment and not due to the groups not being similar enough.

A valid matching must be made on data that is not related to the treatment
or anything that the treatment could have affected in any way.
Many matching algorithms can only match on a single variable,
so you first have to turn many variables into a single varaible
by using an index or a propensity score.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Propensity\_Score\_Matching}}
The \texttt{iematch}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iematch}}
command in the \texttt{ietoolkit} package developed by DIME Analytics
produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> \subsection{Structuring datasets over multiple time periods}

Author: Suggestion from @bbdaniels. Include rosters, clusters and strata and call this subsection "structuring complex data". Lets discuss

Reviewer: that makes sense to me

Your data map and master dataset requirements also depends on
whether you are using data from one time period or several.
A study that observes data in only one time period is called
a \textbf{cross-sectional study}.
\index{cross-sectional data}
This type of data is relatively easy to collect and handle because
you do not need to track individuals across time.
Instead, the challenge in a cross-sectional study is to
show that the control group is indeed a valid counterfactual to the treatment group.

> A study that observes data in multiple time periods is called \textbf{longitudinal}\index{longitudinal data}

Author: @bbdaniels , you said "check this" to _longitudinal_. Do you disagree? I am not sure what you mean.

Reviewer: the grammar of this isn't quite right, (the study isn't called longitudinal data) -- perhaps: "Observations over multiple time periods, referred to as longitudinal data, can be either repeated cross-sections or panel data"

Author: ok, I see now. Fixed in cc2708116e4be7c887fe5bb4e57ef381d37a8ef9

and the field counterpart might not be aware that their actions are the implementation of your research.
Therefore, you must acquire monitoring data that tells you how well the treatment assignment in the field
corresponds to your intended treatment assignment.

Another example of a research design where monitoring data is important
are regression discontinuity (RD) designs
where the discontinuity is a cutoff for eligibility of the treatment. 
For example, 
let's say your project studies the impact of a program for students that scored under 50\% at a test.
We might have the exact results of the tests for all students, 
and therefore know who should be offered the program, 
however that is not the same as knowing who attended the program. 
A teacher might offer the program to someone that scored 51\% at the test,
and someone that scored 49\% at the might decline to participate in the program.
We should not pass judgment on a teacher that offers a program to a student
they think can benefit from it, 
but if that was not inline with our research assumptions,
then we need to understand how common that was.
Otherwise the result of our research will not be helpful

> in evaluating the program.

Author: @bbdaniels suggested: maybe replace this with a discussion on treatment compliance or take-up or both? Lets discsuss.

Author: moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/464

	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Randomization\_in\_Stata}}
However, for \textit{reproducible} randomization, we need two additional properties:
we need to be able to fix the sequence of numbers generated and
ensure that the first number is independently randomized.
In Stata, this is accomplished through three concepts:
\textbf{versioning}, \textbf{sorting}, and \textbf{seeding}.
We again use Stata in our examples,
but the same principles translate to all other programming languages.

% rule 1: versioning
\textbf{Versioning} means using the same version of the software each time you run the random process.
If anything is different, the underlying list of random numbers may have changed,
and it will be impossible to recover the original result.
In Stata, the \texttt{version} command ensures that the list of random numbers is fixed.\sidenote{
	At the time of writing, we recommend using \texttt{version 13.1} for backward compatibility;
	the algorithm used to create this list of random numbers was changed after Stata 14 but the improvements do not matter in practice.
	You will \textit{never} be able to reproduce a randomization in a different software,

> 	such as moving from Stata to R or vice versa.}

Author: @bbdaniels suggestion: long side note, should we put int into the text?

I think we can maybe solve it by removing the sentence:
> You will \textit{never} be able to reproduce a randomization in a different software,
such as moving from Stata to R or vice versa.}

Author: removed in 6760d00b22580019fd278d23a676f8bfa38beb9d

In Stata, the only way to guarantee a unique sorting order is to use
\texttt{isid [id\_variable], sort}.
(The \texttt{sort, stable} command is insufficient.)
Since the exact order must be unchanged,
the underlying data itself must be unchanged as well between runs.
This means that if you expect the number of observations to change
(for example to increase during ongoing data collection),
your randomization will not be stable unless you split your data up into
smaller fixed datasets where the number of observations does not change.
You can combine all
those smaller datasets after your randomization.

% rule 3: seeding
\textbf{Seeding} means manually setting the start point in the list of random numbers.
A seed is just a single number that specifies one of the possible start points.
It should be at least six digits long and you should use exactly
one unique, different, and randomly created seed per randomization process.\sidenote{You
	can draw a uniformly distributed six-digit seed randomly by visiting \url{https://bit.ly/stata-random}.
	(This link is a just shortcut to request such a random number on \url{https://www.random.org}.)

> 	There are many more seeds possible but this is a large enough set for most purposes.}

Author: @bbdaniels suggestion: long side note, should we put int into the text?

Reviewer: suggest rephrasing to: You can draw a uniformly distributed six-digit seed randomly from random.org (\url{https://bit.ly/stata-random}). Six digits is typically sufficient.

Reviewer: why 6? is there any rule of thumb we can give for why that's sufficient?

Author: 6 digits is commonly used as security codes when the code should rarely be repeated but should be possible to handle for a human brain. For example, if a website texts you a security code it is often 6 digits long (or the WB hard token). And you can memorize the code for ten seconds by repeating in your brain "twenty-four sixty-seven twelve" while you transfer the digits somewhere. 8 digits is so much more prone to memorizing errors.

Not that you need to memorize seeds often, but 6 digits is just a good balance of unique and easy-of-use. But I do not have a better rule of thumb than that.

Reviewer: ok cool. i don't have a different rule of thumb, so leaving it at 6 digits seems fine to me.  stata's recommendation is an element chosen randomly from the set {0, 1, . . . , 2,147,483,647}.

\subsection{Creating master datasets and a data map}

A \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}
\index{master datasets}
details all project-wide time-invariant information
about all units that could appear in the data
and their relationship to the research design,
like sampling and treatment status once those are determined.
Solving all of these questions before you acquire any data,
and making sure that the full research team knows where to find this information,
will save a ton of time later on,
and will increase the quality of your research.

You should create a master dataset
for each unit of observation
important to the research.
A unit used for any significant research activity,
like data collection or data analysis, 
must always be considered an important unit of observation.
Therefore, any unit
that will be used in sampling or treatment assignment,
must have a master dataset,
and that master dataset -- not field data --
should be used when sampling or assigning treatment.

You also need to record how all datasets for each unit of observation
will link or merge with each other as needed.

> This linking scheme is called a \textbf{data map}\sidenote{

Reviewer: It would be helpful to make this more concrete with some suggestions of how to make a data map (and/or examples), specifically what software one would use to actually create a data map. i've seen anything ranging from scribbles on the back of a piece of paper, to nicely formatted Word diagrams, to Excel sheets...

Author: My planning for the wiki page is that it will include examples, and I will provide an Excel sheet template. Might include a flow chart example as well.

Reviewer: What are you thinking of as a data map Luiza? can you give an example?

Reviewer: i think our conversation today clarified this enough to close the conversation here, though i'm sure we'll return to it when we have a rewrite.

	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/data\_map} (TO BE CREATED)}.
\index{data maps} 
A data map is more than just a list of datasets.

> Its purpose is to specify the characteristics and linkages of those datasets.

Reviewer: in my experience it's also useful for the data map to link back to the research design, e.g. the variables in the primary specification. this datasets is how we'll get outcome X, control vector will come from that dataset, etc etc. that also ties into the theme of this chapter of developing the measurement framework.

Reviewer: @kbjarkefur @luizaandrade leaving this open for the moment in case informative as you work on the data map content, feel free to close if not

Author: Moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/465

Your data map must indicate which ID variables can be used and how to merge datasets.
It is common that administrative data use IDs 
that are different than the project IDs, 
and the linkage between those should be clear from your master dataset.

The data map should also include metadata about the handling of all information.
These characteristics may be updated as the project progresses.
For example, you will need to note the original source of each dataset,
as well as the project folder where 
the raw original data and codebooks are stored
and where the back-ups for the each raw dataset are stored.

Some of the characteristics in your master datasets and your data map
should be filled in during the planning stage,
but both of them should be active resources 
that are updated as your project evolves.
Finally, your master data should not include any unlabeled missing values. 
If the information is missing for one unit, 
then the reason should always be indicated with a code.
An example for such reason could be that a unit was not included in the treatment assignment
as it was not sampled in the first place,
or was not located in the data collection at a given round.

> \subsection{Defining study comparisons using master data}

Reviewer: the content below doesn't really match this heading yet (but the premise of the heading is great and gives a nice logical structure to the chapter). i think there needs to be more specific reference, something along the lines of now that the master data is set up you can do the treatment assignment. and making it clear that master data always needs the variables that describe the different research designs described. possibly even being explicit about what those variables are.

Author: moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/468

	\textbf{Counterfactual:} A statistical description of what would have happened
	to specific individuals in an alternative scenario,
	for example, a different treatment assignment outcome.}
\index{counterfactual}
The key assumption is that each
person, facility, or village (or whatever the unit of intervention is)
had two possible states: their outcome if they did receive the treatment
and their outcome if they did not receive that treatment.
The average impact of the treatment is defined as
the difference between these two states averaged over all units.

However, we can never observe the same unit
in both the treated and untreated state simultaneously,
so we cannot calculate these differences directly.
Instead, the treated group is compared to a control group
that is statistically indistinguishable,
which makes the average impact of the treatment
mathematically equivalent to the difference in averages between the groups.
Statistical similarity is often defined
as \textbf{balance} between two or more groups.	
This test is so common,	
DIME Analytics created the Stata command \texttt{iebaltab}\sidenote{	
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iebaltab}}	

> to generates tables of balance checks	

Reviewer: would be useful to add 1 sentence on what iebaltab does and what makes it unique

Reviewer: imagine there will be the same objection to this as to iematch, but i think it's useful to add a little more on what iebaltab does well (automates a process done commonly, creates nicely formatted outputs)

Reviewer: Suggested rephrase: 
Since balance tests are commonly run for impact evaluations, DIME Analytics created a Stata command to standardize and automate the creation of nicely-formatted balance tables: \texttt{iebaltab}\sidenote{	
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iebaltab}}.

Author: Also sounds good to me, done in f67135387749abad7273236c10bf0b7f3ca56dfc

the treatment status, but instead influence the \textit{probability of treatment}.
You will need variables in your data
that can be used to estimate the probability of treatment for each unit.
These variables are called \textbf{instruments}.
In IV designs, instead of the ordinary regression estimator,
a special version called two-stage least squares (2SLS) is used
to estimate the impact of the treatment.
Stata has a built-in command called \texttt{ivregress},
and another popular implementation is the user-written command \texttt{ivreg2}.

%%%%% Matching

\textbf{Matching}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Matching}}
methods use observable characteristics to construct
sets of treatment and control units
where the observations in each set 
are as similar as possible. \index{matching}
These sets can either consist of exactly one treatment and one control observation (one-to-one),
a set of observations where
both groups have more than one observation represented (many-to-many),
or where only one group has more than one observation included (one-to-many).
By now you can probably guess that 

> the result of the matching needs to be saved in the master dataset.

Reviewer: often being both the score and the resulting pairing

Author: I think the score is similar to instrument variables. Not certain they mean something time-invariant. And in the case of matching, you never merge the score to your analysis data, only the pairs, or the treatment assignment based on the pair.

This section will be re-written tho. So I will resolve this conversation.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\subsection{Structuring datasets over multiple time periods}

Your data map and master dataset requirements also depends on
whether you are using data from one time period or several.
A study that observes data in only one time period is called
a \textbf{cross-sectional study}.
\index{cross-sectional data}
This type of data is relatively easy to collect and handle because
you do not need to track individuals across time.
Instead, the challenge in a cross-sectional study is to
show that the control group is indeed a valid counterfactual to the treatment group.

A study that observes data in multiple time periods is called \textbf{longitudinal}\index{longitudinal data}
and can either be a \textbf{repeated cross-sections}
or a \textbf{panel data} study.\index{panel data} \index{repeated cross-sectional data}
In repeated cross-sections,
each successive round of data collection uses a new random sample
of observations from the treatment and control groups,
but in a panel data study the same observations are tracked and included each round.

> If you are using panel data study,

Reviewer: 'panel data study' is strange phrasing. perhaps instead, 'if you are working on a study that uses panel data' or 'if you are using panel data for your study'

then your data map must document how the different rounds will be merged or appended,
and your master dataset will be the authoritative source of which ID that will be used. 

> You must keep track of the \textit{attrition rate} in longitudinal data,

Reviewer: only with panel data. attrition over time doesn't make sense for repeated cross section (since observations naturally go in and out with cross section)

Author: good point, agree! simply changed to "panel data" in: 3cdba9ceda588cc227db87573e52f87c1c746992

which is the share of observations not observed in follow-up data.
It is common that the observations not possible to track
can be correlated with the outcome you study.
For example, poorer households may live in more informal dwellings,
patients with worse health conditions might not survive to follow-up,
and so on.
If this is the case, then your results might only be an effect of your remaining sample
being a subset of the original sample that were better or worse off from the beginning.
You should have a variable in your master dataset that indicates attrition.
A balance check using the attrition variable can provide insights
as to whether the lost observations were systematically different
compared to the rest of the sample,

> and there are a variety of methods for estimating treatment effects

Reviewer: add link to methods (through wiki)

Author: @bbdaniels , you wrote this sentence. I am actually not sure what these methods are. It makes sense to me that they exist, but I do not know what they are called.

Author: done in 7b1482fbe447c51804fa12a0d36d019576d37235

with selective attrition.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\subsection{Monitoring data}

Another type of data that is, in certain research designs,

> very important for the validity of your research is \textbf{monitoring data}.\sidenote{

Reviewer: suggest changing to: 'For any study with an ex-ante design, monitoring data is very important for understanding whether field realities match the research design'

Author: I like it - implemented in 1e838c7fd502049558fa5b91985cd673d542ed75

to be included in data collection when the cost of collecting data on everyone is prohibitive.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Sample\_Size\_and\_Power\_Calculations}}
But it can also select a sub-sample of your observations to test a computationally heavy process 
before running it on the full data.
\textbf{Randomized treatment assignment} is the process of assigning observations into treatment arms,
and this is central to experimental research design.
Most of the code processes used for randomized assignment are the same as those used for sampling,
since it is also a process of splitting a list of observations into groups.
Where sampling determines whether a particular individual
will be observed at all in the course of data collection,
randomized assignment determines if each individual will be observed
as a treatment observation or used as a counterfactual.
The list of units to sample or assign from may be called a \textbf{sampling universe},
a \textbf{listing frame}, or something similar.
This list should always be your \textbf{master dataset} when possible.
The rare exceptions when master datasets cannot be used is when sampling must be done in real time,

> for example, randomly sampling patients as they arrive at a health facility.

Reviewer: add that in this case it will be important to document as much as possible so that treatment assignment can be added to master after

Author: done in fc3bf627c81346ad5c8b35a646d7faef8d6626b4

re-run the code, and use \texttt{cf} or \texttt{datasignature} to ensure
nothing has changed. It is also advisable to let someone else reproduce your
randomization results on their machine to remove any doubt that your results
are reproducible.
Once the result of a randomization is used in the field,
there is no way to correct any mistakes.

\codeexample{reproducible-randomization.do}{./code/reproducible-randomization.do}

Some types of experimental designs necessitate
that randomized assignment results be revealed in the field.
It is possible to do this using survey software or live events, such as a live lottery.
These methods typically do not leave a record of the randomization,
as such can never be reproducible. 
However, you can often run your randomization in advance 
even when you do not have list of eligible units in advance.
Let's say you want to, at various health facilities, 
randomly select a sub-sample of patients as they arrive.
You can then have a pre-generated list 
with a random order of ''in sample'' and ''not in sample''.
Your field staff would then go through this list in order
and cross off one randomized result as it is used for a patient.

> This is especially beneficial if you are implementing a more complex randomization,

Reviewer: the below examples are super but i wonder if should move to wiki? feels like a finer level of detail than other sections.

Author: https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/467

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}

In this chapter we will show how you can save a lot of time
and increase the quality of your research by planning your project's data requirements
based on your research design.
There are many published resources about 
the theories behind different research designs.
This chapter will instead focus on how the design 
impacts a project's data requirements.
We assume you have a working familiarity
with the research designs mentioned here.
If needed, you can reference Appendix XYZ,
where you will find more details 
and specific references for each design.

Planning data requirements is more than just listing the data your project will need. 

> It is mostly about understanding how to structure the project's data to best answer its research question, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It requires understanding how to structure the project's data to best answer the research questions, 
```

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}

In this chapter we will show how you can save a lot of time

> and increase the quality of your research by planning your data requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and increase the quality of your research by planning your project's data requirements
```

	to specific individuals in an alternative scenario,
	for example, a different treatment assignment outcome.}
\index{counterfactual}
The key assumption is that each
person, facility, or village (or whatever the unit of intervention is)
had two possible states: their outcome if they did receive the treatment
and their outcome if they did not receive that treatment.
The average impact of the treatment is defined as
the difference between these two states averaged over all units.

However, we can never observe the same unit
in both the treated and untreated state simultaneously,
so we cannot calculate these differences directly.
Instead, the treatment group is compared to a control group
that is statistically indistinguishable,
which makes the average impact of the treatment
mathematically equivalent to the difference in averages between the groups.
Statistical similarity is often defined
as \textbf{balance} between two or more groups.	
This test is so common,	
DIME Analytics created the Stata command \texttt{iebaltab}\sidenote{	
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iebaltab}}	
to generates tables of balance checks	
as part of the package \texttt{ietoolkit}.	

> However, each research design has its different method	

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each research design has a different method	for identifying the statistically-similar control group. 
```

for how the statistically similar control group is identified.

The rest of this section covers how data requirements differ
between different research designs.
What does not differ, however, is that the authoritative source
for which units are in the treatment group and which are in the control group
should always be one or several variables in your master dataset. 
You will often have to merge that data to other datasets, 
but that is an easy task if you created a data map.

%%%%% Experimental design

In \textbf{experimental research designs}, 

> such as \textbf{randomized control trials (RCTs),\sidenote{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as \textbf{randomized control trials (RCTs)},\sidenote{
```

or where only one group has more than one observation included (one-to-many).
By now you can probably guess that 
the result of the matching needs to be saved in the master dataset.
This is best done by assigning an ID to each matching set, 
and create a variable in the master dataset 
with the ID for the set each unit belongs to.
The matching can even be done before the randomized assignment,
so that treatment can be randomized within each matching set.
This is a type of experimental design.
Furthermore, if no control observations were identified before the treatment,
then matching can be used to ex-post identify a control group.
Many matching algorithms can only match on a single variable,
so you first have to turn many variables into a single variable
by using an index or a propensity score.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Propensity\_Score\_Matching}}
The \texttt{iematch}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/iematch}}
command in the \texttt{ietoolkit} package developed by DIME Analytics
produces matchings based on a single continuous matching variable.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> \subsection{Structuring datasets over multiple time periods}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\subsection{Structuring complex data}
```

You should have a variable in your master dataset that indicates attrition.
A balance check using the attrition variable can provide insights
as to whether the lost observations were systematically different
compared to the rest of the sample,
and there are a variety of methods for estimating treatment effects
with selective attrition.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\subsection{Monitoring data}

For any study with an ex-ante design, 
\textbf{monitoring data}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Monitoring\_Data}}
is very important for understanding whether field realities match the research design.
\index{monitoring data}
Monitoring data is used to understand if the
assumptions made during the research design corresponds to what is true in reality.
The most typical example is to make sure that, in an experimental design,
the treatment was implemented according to your treatment assignment.

The implementation of your treatment often have to be carried by field counterparts
that have more complex realities than only your research.

> Field work will always be more intricate than a lab environment, 
> and the field counterpart might not be aware that their actions are the implementation of your research.

Author: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the field staff of your partner organization,
might not be aware that their actions are the implementation of your research.
```

corresponds to your intended treatment assignment,
for nearly all research designs.

Another example of a research design where monitoring data is important
are regression discontinuity (RD) designs
where the discontinuity is a cutoff for eligibility of the treatment. 
For example, 
let's say your project studies the impact of a program for students that scored under 50\% at a test.
We might have the exact results of the tests for all students, 
and therefore know who should be offered the program, 
however that is not the same as knowing who attended the program. 
A teacher might offer the program to someone that scored 51\% at the test,
and someone that scored 49\% at the might decline to participate in the program.
We should not pass judgment on a teacher that offers a program to a student
they think can benefit from it, 
but if that was not inline with our research assumptions,
then we need to understand how common that was.
Otherwise the result of our research will not be helpful
in evaluating the program.

Monitoring data is particularly prone to errors 
relating to merging with other data set. 
It is too late to think about how monitoring data will be merged

> with the rest of the data, after the monitoring data is already collected.

Reviewer 3: well, you still need to merge it after it is collected, so it's not too late for that.
I assume the idea is that it is too late to think about what it should look like to be most efficiently merged?

Author: I see your point. Or that it is the least error prone to do it before hand.

Author: Simply removed that sentence in 0c76937f6f91febac870f266c83dc337d22f47d9. Two sentences later we talk about the best time to figure this out when you prepare data map.

If you send a team to simply record the name of all people attending a training,
then potentially different spellings of names 
-- especially when names have to be transcribed from other alphabets to the Latin alphabet --
will be the biggest source of error in your monitoring activity.
The time to discuss and document how monitoring data will be merged with precision
to the rest of your data, is when you are creating your data map.
The solution is often very simple, it is just a matter of solving it before it is too late.
An example of a solution is to provide the monitoring teams 
with lists of the people's names spelled the same way as in your master dataset. 
Include both the people you expect to attend the training,
and people that you do not expect to attend,

> but do not tell the monitoring team which person you expect to attend the training.

Reviewer 3: Add some wording about how the tracking of observations should be defined before any data collection is made, and kept the same across all round of data collection. This is a good example, but is not unique to monitoring data, and does not link to why this should be done at the data map stage, as opposed to right before monitoring.

Author: Moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/465

the set of individuals who are going to be observed
and what their status will be for the purpose of effect estimation.
In quasi-experimental methods, random sampling determines what populations the study
will be able to make meaningful inferences about,
and random treatment assignment creates counterfactuals.
Randomization\sidenote{
	\textbf{Randomization} is often used interchangeably to mean random treatment assignment.
	In this book however, \textit{randomization} will only be used to describe the process of generating
	a sequence of unrelated numbers, i.e. a random process. 
	\textit{Randomization} will never be used to mean the process of assigning units in treatment and control groups,
	that will always be called \textit{random treatment assignment},
	or a derivative thereof.} 
is used to ensure that a sample is representative and
that any treatment and control groups are statistically indistinguishable
after treatment assignment.

Randomization in statistical software is non-trivial
and its mechanics are unintuitive for the human brain.
The principles of randomization we will outline
apply not just to random sampling and random assignment,

> but they apply to all statistical computing processes that have a random components

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but to all statistical computing processes that have random components
```

such as simulations and bootstrapping.
Furthermore, all random processes introduce statistical noise
or uncertainty into estimates of effect sizes.
Choosing one random sample from all the possibilities produces some probability of
choosing a group of units that are not, in fact, representative.
Similarly, choosing one random assignment produces some probability of
creating groups that are not good counterfactuals.
\textit{Power calculation} and \textit{randomization inference}
are the main methods by which these probabilities of error are assessed.
These analyses are particularly important in the initial phases of development research --
typically conducted before any actual field work occurs --
and have implications for feasibility, planning, and budgeting.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\subsection{Randomizing sampling and treatment assignment}

% sampling universe: the master dataset

> \textbf{Sampling} is the process of randomly selecting units-of-observation
> from a list of individuals to create a representative or statistically similar sub-sample.\index{sampling}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\textbf{Sampling} is the process of randomly selecting observations
from a list of individuals to create a representative or statistically similar sub-sample.\index{sampling}
```
"Selecting unit of observation" seems like choosing between household or school level

> This can, for example, select a subset from all eligible units
> to be included in data collection when the cost of collecting data on everyone is prohibitive.\sidenote{
> 	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Sample\_Size\_and\_Power\_Calculations}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This process can be used, for example, to select a subset from all eligible units
to be included in data collection when the cost of collecting data on everyone is prohibitive.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Sample\_Size\_and\_Power\_Calculations}}
```

> But it can also select a sub-sample of your observations to test a computationally heavy process 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But it can also be used to select a sub-sample of your observations to test a computationally heavy process 
```

before running it on the full data.

> \textbf{Randomized treatment assignment} is the process of assigning observations into treatment arms,
> and this is central to experimental research design.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\textbf{Randomized treatment assignment} is the process of assigning observations to different treatment arms.
This process is central to experimental research design.
```

Most of the code processes used for randomized assignment are the same as those used for sampling,

> since it is also a process of splitting a list of observations into groups.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
since it is also a process of randomly splitting a list of observations into groups.
```

Author: ```suggestion
since it is also a randomized process of splitting a list of observations into groups.
```
Does my suggestion sound more as a structured process of randomization? Want to avoid that it sounds at all as the millennials' usage of the word "random"

Where sampling determines whether a particular individual
will be observed at all in the course of data collection,
randomized assignment determines if each individual will be observed
as a treatment observation or used as a counterfactual.
The list of units to sample or assign from may be called a \textbf{sampling universe},
a \textbf{listing frame}, or something similar.
This list should always be your \textbf{master dataset} when possible.

> The rare exceptions when master datasets cannot be used is when sampling must be done in real time,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The rare exceptions when master datasets cannot be used is when sampling must be done in real time --
```

which each represent different varieties of treatments to be delivered;
in some cases, multiple treatment arms are intended to overlap in the same sample.
Complexity can therefore grow very quickly in randomized assignment
and it is doubly important to fully understand the conceptual process
that is described in the experimental design,
and fill in any gaps before implementing it in code.
The do-file below provides an example of how to implement
a randomized assignment with multiple treatment arms.

\codeexample{simple-multi-arm-randomization.do}{./code/simple-multi-arm-randomization.do}

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\subsection{Programming reproducible random processes}

% what it means for randomization to be reproducible
For statistical programming to be reproducible,
you must be able to re-obtain its exact outputs in the future.\cite{orozco2018make}
We will focus on what you need to do to produce
truly random results for your project,
to ensure you can get those results again.
This takes a combination of strict rules, solid understanding, and careful programming.

> This section introduces the strict rules:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section introduces strict rules:
```

Author: it refers back to the "strict rules" mentioned in the previous sentence. Hence the "the"

these are non-negotiable (but thankfully simple).
Stata, like most statistical software, uses a \textbf{pseudo-random number generator}
which, in ordinary research use, 
produces sequences of number that are as good as random.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Randomization\_in\_Stata}}
However, for \textit{reproducible} randomization, we need two additional properties:
we need to be able to fix the sequence of numbers generated and
we need to ensure that the first number is independently randomized.
In Stata, this is accomplished through three concepts:
\textbf{versioning}, \textbf{sorting}, and \textbf{seeding}.
We again use Stata in our examples,
but the same principles translate to all other programming languages.

% rule 1: versioning
\textbf{Versioning} means using the same version of the software each time you run the random process.
If anything is different, the underlying list of random numbers may have changed,

> and it will be impossible to recover the original result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and it may be impossible to recover the original result.
```

To be clear: you should not set a single seed once in the master do-file,
but instead you should set a new seed in code right before each random process.
The most important thing is that each of these seeds is truly random,
so do not use shortcuts such as the current date or a seed you have used before.
You should also describe in your code how the seed was selected.

% testing randomization reproducibility
Other commands may induce randomness in the data,
change the sorting order,
or alter the place of the random generator without you realizing it,
so carefully confirm exactly how your code runs before finalizing it.
To confirm that a randomization has worked correctly before finalizing its results,
save the outputs of the process in a temporary location,
re-run the code, and use \texttt{cf} or \texttt{datasignature} to ensure
nothing has changed. It is also advisable to let someone else reproduce your
randomization results on their machine to remove any doubt that your results
are reproducible.
Once the result of a randomization is used in the field,
there is no way to correct any mistakes.

\codeexample{reproducible-randomization.do}{./code/reproducible-randomization.do}

> Some types of experimental designs necessitate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some types of experimental designs require
```

that randomized assignment results be revealed in the field.
It is possible to do this using survey software or live events, such as a live lottery.
These methods typically do not leave a record of the randomization,

> as such can never be reproducible. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and as such are never reproducible. 
```

and ask a longer version of the questionnaire to 20\% of both 
the group of patients that watch the video and those that did not.
The real time randomization is much more likely to be implemented correctly,
if your field staff simply can follow a list with the randomized categories
where you are in control fo the pre-determined proportions and the random order.
This way, you can also control with precision,
how these categories are evenly distributed across all health facilities.

Finally, if this real-time randomization implementation is done using survey software,
then the pre-generated list of randomized categories can be preloaded
into the questionnaire.
Then the field team can follow a list of respondent IDs 
that are randomized into the appropriate categories,
and the survey software can show a video and control which version of the questionnaire is asked.
This way, you reduce the risk of errors in field randomization.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\subsection{Clustering or stratifying a random sample or assignment}

% the cases discussed so far are the most simple, but not the most common

> For a variety of reasons, random sampling and rassignment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a variety of reasons, random sampling and random treatment assignment
```

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\begin{fullwidth}

In this chapter we will show how you can save a lot of time
and increase the quality of your research by planning your data requirements
based on your research design.
There are many published resources about 
the theories behind different research designs.
This chapter will instead focus on how the design 
impacts a project's data requirements.
We assume you have a working familiarity
with the research designs mentioned here.
If needed, you can reference Appendix XYZ,
where you will find more details 

> and specific references for each design.

Author: moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/468

Planning data requirements is more than just listing the data your project will need. 
Planning data requirements includes understanding how to
link the different data sources your project will use.
It also involves creating the tools your team can use
to make sure that understanding is shared across your team.
The first step of this process is to create master datasets 
for every unit of observation in your study,
and to create a data map, 

> detailing how the master datasets are interlinked.

Reviewer: How about:
The first step of the process is to determine the data needs of the project, based on the research design and measurement framework. The data map diagrams each data source the project will use, the unit of response, frequency of measurement, and the level(s) at which it can be linked to other datasets within the framework.

These master datasets will serve three key functions.
First, they will list all of the units who are eligible for the study,
and enable you to map data collected or received from the field to the research design.
Second, in designs where your team has direct control over interventions or other field work,
they will allow you to complete sampling and treatment assignment tasks
before those tasks are implemented in the field.
Finally, they will function as a single unambiguous location where all information 
related to the implementation and validity of your research is stored,

> as well as all information needed to correctly identify any observation in any of your project's datasets.

Author: moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/468

The second half of this chapter covers random sampling and assignment
and the necessary practices to ensure that 
these and other random processes are reproducible.
Almost all research designs rely on a random component 
for the results of the research to be a valid interpretation of the real world.
This includes both how a sample is representative to the population studied,
or how the counterfactual observations in experimental design are statistically indistinguishable
from the treatment observations.
The second half concludes with a discussion of power calculations and randomization inference,
and how both are important tools to make optimal choices when planning data work.

\end{fullwidth}

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\section{Translating research design to master data}

> In most projects, more than one dataset is needed to answer the research question.

Author: I see what you are saying and I am in general agreeing with you. But two points:
* I do not think that the fact that one dataset can have multiple tables, means that that you cannot have several datasets with one table each. It is up you you to define where you draw the line. I think it is perfectly fine to say that my survey data set is one dataset and my scraping data is a different dataset.
* While I think it is part of the book's purpose to push correct usage of terminology, it might be too much to push that strict definition of datasets. Agree worth discussing.

> In most projects, more than one dataset is needed to answer the research question.

Reviewer: @luizaandrade i believe you said you agreed with Kris -- if you do not think we need to discuss further, please resolve

These could be multiple survey rounds,
integration of different data sources (e.g. administrative data,
web scraping, implementation monitoring, etc)

> or complex combinations of the above.

Author: web scraping is not necessarily from a partner. Are you changing this as a result of replacing `datasets` with `data sources` above? Which might be fine, just wondered what your objection was with what it was before.

> For example, you may have different levels of \textbf{unit of observation}\sidenote{

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, you might record data on different \textbf{units of observation}\sidenote{
```

	The \textbf{unit of observation} is the unit at or for which data is collected. See
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}},

> or the units of observation you do have (or their subunits)
> may vary from round to round.

Author: ```suggestion
in the point in time,
and which unit you record data on can vary over time.
```

However your study is structured, you need to know how to link all the datasets you obtain
and analyze the relationships between the units that appear in them
to answer all your research questions.
You might think that you are able to keep all of the relevant details in your head,
but your whole research team is unlikely to have the same understanding,
at all times, of all the datasets required.
The only way to make sure that the full team shares the same understanding
is to create \textit{master datasets} and a \textit{data map}.

> \subsection{Creating master datasets and a data map}

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/465

A \textbf{master dataset}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Master\_Data\_Set}}
\index{master datasets}
details all project-wide time-invariant information
about all units that could appear in the data
and their relationship to the research design,
like sampling and treatment status once those are determined.

> Solving all of these questions before you acquire any data,

Author: this sentence does not exists anymore

and making sure that the full research team knows where to find this information,
will save a ton of time later on,
and will increase the quality of your research.

> 

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/465

You should create a master dataset
for each unit of observation
important to the research.
A unit used for any significant research activity,
like data collection or data analysis, 
must always be considered an important unit of observation.
Therefore, any unit
that will be used in sampling or treatment assignment,
must have a master dataset,
and that master dataset -- not field data --

> should be used when sampling or assigning treatment.

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/465

for example, school administrative data merged with student data.
Your data map must indicate which ID variables can be used and how to merge datasets.
It is common that administrative data use IDs 
that are different than the project IDs, 
and the linkage between those should be clear from your master dataset.

The data map should also include metadata about the handling of all information.
These characteristics may be updated as the project progresses.
For example, you will need to note the original source of each dataset,
as well as the project folder where 
the raw original data and codebooks are stored
and where the back-ups for the each raw dataset are stored.

Some of the characteristics in your master datasets and your data map
should be filled in during the planning stage,
but both of them should be active resources 
that are updated as your project evolves.
Finally, your master data should not include any unlabeled missing values. 
If the information is missing for one unit, 
then the reason should always be indicated with a code.
An example for such reason could be that a unit was not included in the treatment assignment
as it was not sampled in the first place,

> or was not located in the data collection at a given round.

Author: moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/467

between different research designs.
What does not differ, however, is that the authoritative source
for which unit is a treated unit and which is a control unit
should always be one or several variables in your master dataset. 
You will often have to merge that data to other datasets, 
but that is an easy task if you created a data map.

%%%%% Experimental design

In \textbf{experimental research designs},\sidenote{
	For example, \textbf{randomized control trials (RCTs) --}
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Randomized\_Control\_Trials}}
\index{randomized control trials} \index{experimental research designs}
the research team determines which members
of the studied population will receive the treatment.
This is typically done by a randomized assignment process
in which a subset of the eligible population
is randomly selected to receive the treatment
(see later in this chapter for how to implement this).
The intuition is that if everyone in the eligible population
is assigned at random to either the treatment or control group,
then the two groups will, on average, be statistically indistinguishable,
The treatment will therefore not be correlated with anything

> but the impact of that treatment.\cite{duflo2007using}

Author: I read this a more general way of describing "having received treatment". Since not all treatments are "received". Living across the street from a different school district is a type of treatment assignment, but no one "received" anything there. Or farmers that experiences a natural disaster. I think "received" is very much associated with RCT types of treatment. 

But if you are confused by this sentence, than many people will.

The randomized assignment should be done using the master data,

> and the result should be saved there before being merged to other datasets.

Reviewer: Need to clarify language around master dataset so that it is clear that it is to serve as key or crosswalk and not to be (permanently) merged into other data sources; @luizaandrade good if you could suggest edits

%%%%% Quasi-experimental design

\textbf{Quasi-experimental research designs},\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Quasi-Experimental\_Methods}}
\index{quasi-experimental research designs}
by contrast, are based on events not controlled by the research team.
Instead, they rely on ``experiments of nature'',
in which natural variation in treatment can be argued to approximate randomization.
You must have a way to measure this natural variation,

> and how the variation is categorzied as outcomes of a naturally randomized assignment

Author: What are other examples? I think you all three knows this better than I do.

> and how the variation is categorzied as outcomes of a naturally randomized assignment

Reviewer: This relates to Luiza's point below that the divisions are at different levels, this should be clarified and resolved as new skeleton is created.

must be documented in your master dataset.
Unlike carefully planned experimental designs,
quasi-experimental designs typically require the luck
of having access to data collected at the right times and places
to exploit events that occurred in the past.
Therefore, these methods often use either secondary data,
including administrative data or other classes of routinely-collected information,
and it is important that your data map documents 
how that data is merged to any other data.

> %%%%% Regression discontinuity

Reviewer: see issue https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/462#issue-643327121

\textbf{Regression discontinuity (RD)}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Regression\_Discontinuity}}
\index{regression discontinuity}
designs exploit sharp breaks or limits
in policy designs to separate a single group of potentially eligible recipients
into comparable groups of individuals who do and do not receive a treatment.
Common examples are test score thresholds and income thresholds,
where the individuals on one side of some threshold receive
a treatment but those on the other side do not.\sidenote{
	\url{https://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/regression-discontinuity-porn}}
The intuition is that, on average,
individuals immediately on one side of the threshold
are statistically indistinguishable from the individuals on the other side,
and the only difference is receiving the treatment.
In your data you need an unambiguous way
to define which observations were above or below the cutoff.
The cutoff determinant, or running variable,
is often a continuous variable 
that used to divide the sample into two or more groups. 
Both the running variable and a categorical cutoff variable,

> should be saved in your master dataset.

Author: Will be resolved when re-writing the design section see #462

%%%%% IV regression

\textbf{Instrumental variables (IV)}\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Instrumental\_Variables}}
\index{instrumental variables}
designs, unlike the previous approaches,
assume that the treatment effect is not directly identifiable.
Similar to RD designs,

> IV designs focus on a subset of the variation in treatment take-up.

Author: Will be resolved when re-writing the design section see #462

then your data map must document how the different rounds will be merged or appended,
and your master dataset will be the authoritative source of which ID that will be used. 

You must keep track of the \textit{attrition rate} in panel data,
which is the share of observations not observed in follow-up data.
It is common that the observations not possible to track
can be correlated with the outcome you study.
For example, poorer households may live in more informal dwellings,
patients with worse health conditions might not survive to follow-up,
and so on.
If this is the case, then your results might only be an effect of your remaining sample
being a subset of the original sample that were better or worse off from the beginning.
You should have a variable in your master dataset that indicates attrition.
A balance check using the attrition variable can provide insights
as to whether the lost observations were systematically different
compared to the rest of the sample,
and there are a variety of methods for estimating treatment effects
with selective attrition.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> \subsection{Monitoring data}

Reviewer: I like this suggestion

> \subsection{Monitoring data}

Author: moved to https://github.com/worldbank/dime-data-handbook/issues/468

For any study with an ex-ante design, 
\textbf{monitoring data}\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Monitoring\_Data}}
is very important for understanding whether field realities match the research design.
\index{monitoring data}
Monitoring data is used to understand if the
assumptions made during the research design corresponds to what is true in reality.
The most typical example is to make sure that, in an experimental design,
the treatment was implemented according to your treatment assignment.

> The implementation of your treatment often have to be carried by field counterparts
> that have more complex realities than only your research.

Author: ```suggestion
Treatment implementation is often carried out by partner organizations,
and field realities will always be more intricate than a lab environment.
```
It is not just about the possibility of be able to foresee. I am combining with next sentence. See edit below.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> \section{Advanced topics in research design and randomization}

Reviewer: this seems to fit better as a subsection in the previous rather than a stand-alone, it's very tied to the random processes section

Author: Can do. But then we need to make _Clustering_ and _Stratification_ paragraphs and not subsections.

I implemented in 36406ce2625586e681754298834c7c7647aa27b0 and I think it works.

	\url{https://davegiles.blogspot.com/2019/04/what-is-permutation-test.html}}
Power calculation and randomization inference are the two key tools to doing so.

% why to do power calculations
\textbf{Power calculations} report the likelihood that your experimental design
\index{power calculations}
will be able to detect the treatment effects you are interested in.\sidenote{
	\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Sample\_Size\_and\_Power\_Calculations}}
This measure of \textbf{power} can be described in various different ways,
each of which has different practical uses.\sidenote{
	\url{https://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/stuff_for_blog/chap20.pdf}}
The purpose of power calculations is to identify where the strengths and weaknesses
of your design are located, so you know the relative tradeoffs you will face
by changing your randomization scheme for the final design.

% intuition of power concets: MDE and minimum sample size
The classic definition of power
is the likelihood that a design detects a significant treatment effect,
given that there is a non-zero treatment effect in reality.
There are two common and useful practical applications

> of that definition that give actionable, quantitative results.

Reviewer: what are the two? this is a nice topic sentence but then no follow-up!

Author: @bbdaniels , you wrote this. Are the applications _minimum-detectable-effect_ and _minimum-sample-size_?
